# Identified Challenges

## Constants and Symbols
* Needed to add constants and symbols to AIR model definitions.  This is required so we can give rates in terms of state variables/constants defined in other models, and define symbolic values such as "total population" that refer to an expression over current state variables.
* **Todo**: the UI/UX needs to support constant and symbol definition.  As currently defined, constants and symbols can be defined in a model as either an expression or "extern" to indicate they will be defined externally.
  * Do we need to have "extern"?  We should settle on a common method for overriding definitions in a model.  This should be part of our language definition.
  * Current method involves exposing constants and symbols under "parameters" for nouns and verbs.  This is consistent with our method for state variable values.
  * Constants have their values assigned by evaluating their expression before the start of solution, i.e. based on initial values.
  * Symbols have their values assigned during execution in terms of current values of state variables.

## Naming conventions
* We need a way to procedurally name ids within a model, as composition leads to collisions.
  * **Proposal**: Since the AIR is hierarchical, use a hierarchical system:

```json
{"model": {
 "id": "A",
 "statevariables": [{"id": "X", "label": "A", "type": "float", "initial_value": "0"}],
 "events": [],
 "contants": [],
 "raterewards": [],
 "impulserewards": [],
 "composedrewards": []
}}
{"model": {
 "id": "B",
 "statevariables": [{"id": "Y", "label": "A", "type": "float", "initial_value": "0"}],
 "events": [],
 "contants": [],
 "raterewards": [],
 "impulserewards": [],
 "composedrewards": []
}}
```

Call `A`'s state variable `X`: `A_X`, and `B`'s state variable `Y`: `B_Y`.

Given a noun:

```json
{ "noun": {
  "id": "Noun",
  "model": "A.air",
  "icon": "A.svg",
  "inputvariables": ["X"],
  "outputvariables": ["X"],
  "parameters": [{"id": "X", "val": "0"}]
}}
```

Force the user to set the "id" of the noun to a unique identifier when they create an instance of "Noun".  If the user places two such nouns with identifiers "Q" and "R", then we can refer to their state variables as `Q_A_X` and `R_A_X`.

* **Question**: Since each noun has a single model associated with it, should we allow `Q_X` to be used instead of `Q_A_X`?
  * My current thought on this is "no" for the purpose of simplicity of the initial prototype.
* **Proposal**: For composition of `Q` and `R` the composed model is named `QcR`.
* **Proposal2**: To improve readability of autogenerated code, perhaps it is better to use unicode?
  * `Q⊕R`?
  * We could also do this with hierarchies, but this would complicate user reference.  `Q϶A϶X`.  Alternatively we could use `.` to indicate hierarchy (as it would not be a valid identifier), so have the user write a more familiar `Q.A.X` then during the renaming pass replace all `.` with `϶`

## Composition Rules
* How do we choose what value to take for a state variable?
  * **Proposal**: Take advantage of our composition rules of nouns and verbs.  Noun's take precedence over verbs.
